**[Hawks Online Fantasy Hockey League]{.ul}**

![](media/image1.jpg){width="4.875in" height="4.875in"}

**League Rulebook**

The Hawks Online Fantasy Hockey League (HOFHL) is intended for committed
fantasy hockey players and exists for fun, pride and bragging rights.
The expectation is that all franchise owners will be actively involved
in the running of their franchises, which includes keeping healthy
players in their lineup, responding to league e-mails and trade requests
in a timely manner, and participating in all league events (drafts,
votes, etc.). Owners are expected to have a long-term perspective,
meaning that they will not neglect their team or leave the league just
because they are having a bad season.

Also, not every rule or situation can be specifically addressed in the
rulebook. The Commissioner has the right to make changes, rulings,
impose penalties or address any situation as he / she sees fit to the
benefit of the entire league.

# Table of Contents {#table-of-contents .TOC-Heading}

1.0 ROSTERS 3

2.0 PLAYER PROTECTION (KEEPERS) 4

3.0 THE DRAFT 4

4.0 FREE AGENTS 6

5.0 WAIVERS 6

6.0 TRADES 7

7.0 SCHEDULE, SCORING, & LINEUPS 8

8.0 PLAYOFFS 10

9.0 TEAM TRANSFERS 11

10.0 RULEBOOK CHANGES & VOTING 11

11.0 LEAGUE HISTORY & RECORDS 11

# ROSTERS

Each franchise shall maintain a Standard 18 Man Roster consisting of 13
Active Roster Spots and 5 Bench Roster spots. The Standard Roster number
is allowed to fluctuate through the season due to trades, signings and
injuries, up to a maximum of 21 players (using the Extended Roster as
described in *Section 1.2*) and down to a minimum of 13 players.

1.  **STANDARD ROSTER**

    a.  The 13 Man Active Roster must always include a minimum of 3
        Centers, 2 Left Wings, 2 Right Wings, 4 Defensemen and 2
        Goalies.

    b.  The 5 Bench Roster spots may be filled with players of any
        position, with the exception that a franchise cannot have more
        than 4 Goalies on its Standard Roster (see Extended Roster below
        for exceptions).

2.  **EXTENDED ROSTER (Injured Reserves)**

    a.  Each franchise has an Extended Roster consisting of 3 Injured
        Reserve spots.

    b.  Player eligibility for an IR spot is controlled by ESPN and is
        indicated when a player has a red "IR" or "O" next to his name.
        Once a franchise places a player in an IR spot, that team can
        add a substitute player to their Standard Roster.

    c.  Any player on the Extended Roster may be returned to the
        Standard Roster, provided there is an open spot. If there is not
        an open spot, a separate player from the Standard Roster must be
        dropped in order to make room for the player coming off of IR.

    d.  Extended Roster spots are not to be used to sign injured players
        with the intention of holding on to them until they are healthy.
        These spots should only be used in cases where a player on a
        franchise's Standard Roster becomes injured. Teams abusing the
        Extended Roster are subject to reversal of the transaction(s) in
        question, loss of future draft picks, or other sanctions.

    e.  Goaltenders placed on IR do not count towards the 4 Goalie per
        team limit.

    f.  Players in an Extended Roster spot can remain in that spot even
        after the player is activated by his NHL club. However, a
        franchise will not be able to complete any player transactions
        (adds / drops / trades) while an ineligible player is in an
        Extended Roster Spot.

3.  **POSITION ELIGIBILITY**

ESPN determines the primary position of every NHL player. Players may
gain eligibility for additional positions throughout the season.

# PLAYER PROTECTION (KEEPERS)

1.  1.  a.  The Commissioner's Office will set a date (usually late
            September of each year) that each franchise must select a
            protected list of up to 9 players from their Roster. These
            players, known as "Keepers", will remain the property of
            their current HOFHL Franchise for the upcoming season. All
            unprotected players will remain property of their franchise
            until the upcoming Draft, at which point they are returned
            to the free agent pool and are eligible to be drafted.

        b.  Teams may continue to trade protected and non-protected
            players and draft picks after the Player Protection Date and
            up to 24 hours prior to the Draft.

            1.  In the event that a team's number of draft picks shrinks
                through trades prior to the draft, that team will not
                receive extra picks in the draft to compensate.

            2.  In the event that a franchise's number of protected
                players shrinks through trades prior to the draft, that
                franchise may fill the vacant protected roster spot(s)
                by selecting any non-protected player(s) on its roster.

        c.  The number of picks a team has in the Draft will be
            determined by the number of players they have protected, as
            follows: if x is the total number of players protected, the
            team will participate in the last 18 - x rounds of the Draft
            (See Example 2.1.c).

***Example 2.1.c***

Team A protects 9 players. Team B protects 7 players. Team A's 1^st^ --
9^th^ Round picks will be reserved for its Keepers and will participate
in Rounds 10 -- 19 of the Draft. Team B's 1^st^ -- 7^th^ Round picks
will be reserved for its Keepers and will participate in Rounds 8 -- 19
of the Draft.

# THE DRAFT

2.  1.  a.  The annual Draft will be held towards the last week of
            September and at a time agreed upon by the majority of the
            franchise owners.

        b.  Attendance by all owners is mandatory. In the case of
            unavoidable extenuating circumstances, an owner must either
            pre-rank their selections within ESPN or appoint another
            owner to draft for them. If an owner is consistently failing
            to participate in drafts without good reason, their
            franchise may be revoked.

        c.  Every franchise has 18 draft picks for each season; the
            first 9 of which are used to protect any player owned at the
            Player Protection Date. If a team protects fewer than 9
            players, it will be able to participate in earlier rounds of
            the draft (see *Example 2.1.c*)

        d.  A time limit of 90 second per pick will be enforced.

        e.  The draft format, as restricted by ESPN, is a snake setup
            (Round X -- Team 1, Team 2, Team 3... / Round Y - ... Team
            3, Team 2, Team 1). If ESPN should offer a traditional draft
            format in the future (teams pick in the same order each
            round), or we figure out a way to hold the draft offline,
            the league will switch over to the traditional format.

    2.  **DRAFT ORDER**

        a.  The draft order is based on a combination of prior year's
            post-season performance, regular season standings and a
            draft lottery. The order applies to Rounds 1 -- 9 (the
            Keeper Rounds) and Round 10 (first full Draft round). If a
            snake draft format is used, the order reverses in each round
            starting with Round 11.

  *Picks 1 -- 6:*    The bottom 6 teams from the previous regular season will be entered into the Draft lottery (See *Rule 3.2.b*).
  ------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Picks 7 -- 8:*    Given to the two teams eliminated from the first round of the previous seasons' playoffs. The higher draft order (7^th^), will be granted to the team with the worse regular season record.
  *Picks 9 -- 10:*   Given to the two teams eliminated from the second round of the previous seasons' playoffs. The higher draft order (9^th^), will be granted to the team with the worse regular season record.
  *Pick 11:*         Given to the runner up in the previous season's championship game.
  *Pick 12:*         Given to the previous season champion.

b.  A draft lottery will be used to determine the draft order for the 6
    teams that did not qualify for the post season in the prior year.
    Lottery chances will be based on two factors: (1) Regular Season
    standings and (2) the total number of points each of the 6 teams
    accumulates in 3 weeks the playoffs are held. Franchises will
    receive the following number of lottery entries:

  **Regular Season Finish**   **\# of Entries**      **Total Points For During Playoff Rounds**   **\# of Entries**
  --------------------------- ------------------- -- -------------------------------------------- -------------------
  7^th^ Place                 ***1***                Most Points                                  ***3***
  8^th^ Place                 ***1***                2^nd^ Most Points                            ***3***
  9^th^ Place                 ***2***                3^rd^ Most Points                            ***2***
  10^th^ Place                ***4***                4^th^ Most Points                            ***2***
  11^th^ Place                ***6***                5^th^ Most Points                            ***1***
  12^th^ Place                ***7***                6^th^ Most Points                            ***0***

c.  The draft lottery will be held in late summer and the results will
    be announced to the league shortly thereafter.

**\
**

# FREE AGENTS

3.  1.  a.  A Free Agent is any player listed in ESPN's Player Pool who
            is neither currently on any franchise's Roster nor has been
            dropped from a franchise's Roster in the previous 48 hours
            (see *Section 5.0 Waivers*).

        b.  Each franchise is permitted to sign a maximum of 60 free
            agents each Season. For purposes of signing free agents, a
            Season is defined as the period beginning immediately after
            the Draft and ending at 11:59PM EST on the night the HOFHL
            Championship concludes. From the day after the Championship
            to the following season's Draft, a franchise may not sign
            any free agents.

        c.  Additional acquisitions beyond the 60 will not be granted
            even if a franchise reaches the limit and subsequently a
            player gets injured, or otherwise gains eligibility for an
            Extended Roster spot.

        d.  A player not listed in the ESPN Player Pool cannot be
            acquired.

        e.  Free agent signings are on a first-come, first served basis.

        f.  During the HOFHL Regular Season & Post Season, free agent
            signings that occur after the start of any NHL game on any
            given day will not be processed until the following morning.

# WAIVERS

4.  1.  a.  A franchise may drop a player from its roster (also known as
            placing a player on waivers) at any point and there are no
            limits to the number of players that can be dropped
            (provided a team maintains its minimum roster size
            requirements).

        b.  Once a player is dropped, he will have a 2 day period in
            which other teams may claim him. The only exception to this
            rule is a player who is added and dropped by the same
            franchise on the same day. In these cases, the dropped
            player remains a Free Agent and does not go through the
            waiver process.

        c.  If no team claims a waived player within the 2 day period,
            the player will have cleared waivers and is immediately
            eligible to be signed as a Free Agent.

    2.  **Waiver Priority & Placing a Claim**

        a.  The waiver priority is set at the beginning of the season
            and is the same as the order as the Draft. However, after a
            franchise makes a waiver claim, they are placed at the
            bottom of the waiver priority order.

        b.  Any team can claim a player off of waivers at any time. To
            put a claim in on a waived player, simply add the player to
            your roster in the same manner that you would add a Free
            Agent. At the end of the 2 day waiver period, the player
            will be automatically added to the Standard Roster of the
            franchise winning the claim.

        c.  If your roster will exceed the Standard Roster size as a
            result of placing the claim, ESPN will prompt you to select
            a player from your roster to drop if you win the claim.

        d.  If multiple franchises place a claim on a player during the
            waiver period, the franchise with the highest waiver
            priority will win the claim and have the player added to
            their roster at the end of the 2 days.

# TRADES

5.  1.  a.  Franchises can make an unlimited number of trades throughout
            the year, with the exception of the period between the HOFHL
            Trade Deadline and the end of the HOFHL Championship Game,
            during which time all trade activity is frozen. Trades are
            processed immediately upon approval by both owners, except
            for trades that that occur after the start of any NHL game
            on any given day. In those cases, the players will not be
            traded until the following morning.

        b.  The HOFHL Trade Deadline will be during the final week of
            the HOFHL Regular Season, with the exact date being listed
            within the league.

        c.  Trades can include any combination of players currently on a
            franchise's Standard / Extended Roster and draft picks (both
            current year and future years), and can be made between two
            or more franchises.

        d.  Some scenarios cannot be handled by ESPN (including, but not
            limited to, future year's draft picks, multi-team trades,
            conditional draft picks, trading a player on IR). In these
            cases, all owners involved in the trade must email the terms
            of the trade and their approval to the Commissioner, who
            will manually process and track the trade within the
            website.

        e.  In the case of an uneven number of draft picks changing
            hands, the franchise that is short a pick will not receive a
            compensatory pick. Instead, that franchise will come out of
            the draft with a smaller roster than other teams.

        f.  If a trade causes a franchise to exceed the Standard Roster
            limit, that franchise must immediately waive a player of its
            choice.

        g.  In the case of mid-season trades, the points a player
            accumulated prior to the trade will remain with the original
            owner.

    2.  **Trade Review**

        a.  The league will not have a formal trade veto policy for all
            trades. Not all owners will see eye to eye on player values
            or how to build a team, so it is not up to the entire league
            to dictate how an owner will build their franchise. Owners
            have the right to run their team as they see fit, even when
            that entails needing to make their team worse in the short
            term in order to facilitate long-term rebuilding. Also,
            lopsided trades do happen. Even very lopsided trades do
            happen (Buffalo is still kicking themselves for trading
            Dominik Hasek to Detroit for Vyacheslav Kozlov and a draft
            pick). It is a part of fantasy hockey.

        b.  ***[However,]{.ul}*** to prevent collusion, tanking, or
            other conduct detrimental to the league, all trades are
            subject to review by the Commissioner.

        c.  In the event that questionable activity is suspected, or to
            remove doubt over a controversial trade, the Commissioner
            will ask all parties to the trade to explain their position
            and reason for entering into the agreement.

        d.  If it is determined that an unfair trade was made, the
            offending team(s) are subject to reversal of the trade,
            forfeiture of future draft picks or other sanctions as
            deemed necessary. Previous history of activity within the
            league will be factored into any decisions.

        e.  As part of the review process, the Commissioner may ask up
            to two additional owners not involved with the trade to
            serve as a Trade Review Committee. This Committee will
            review all information and assist the Commissioner in
            determining if the trade should be rejected and any
            sanctions to be imposed.

# SCHEDULE, SCORING, & LINEUPS

6.  1.  a.  The HOFHL Regular Season and Championship is contested over
            the course of the NHL regular season schedule.

        b.  The league will be divided into 2 conferences, each with an
            even number of franchises.

        c.  Every franchise will play each team in their conference 2
            times per season. Franchises will play teams outside their
            conference 1 to 2 times per season, depending on the number
            weeks in the regular season. Generally, the season length
            will be set so that the HOFHL championship week will align
            with 3 weeks left in the NHL regular season.

        d.  During a game week, each HOFHL team will be matched up
            against another team in a head-to-head format. A team's
            objective is to accumulate more fantasy points over the
            course of the week than the opposing team. The owner with
            the most points at the end of the week receives a win.
            Match-ups can end in a tie.

        e.  Generally, a game week is the 7 days beginning at 12:01am
            Monday morning and ending at 11:59pm Sunday night.
            Exceptions to this rule occur during the first week of the
            season and periods during the Olympics, Christmas and
            All-Star Weekend, when the game week is extended to
            accommodate breaks in the NHL schedule. In the cases of game
            weeks that have more than 7 days, the league will be
            notified via the Commissioner's Note within the league.

    2.  **Scoring Categories**

        a.  For forwards & defenseman, the following scoring categories
            & point totals will be used:

  Goals                **3 pts**
  -------------------- --------------------
  Assists              **2 pts**
  Plus/Minus           **+/- 1 pts**
  Power Play Goals     **Addt'l 1 pts**
  Power Play Assists   **Addt'l 1 pts**
  Shots on Goal        **0.4 pts**
  Blocked Shots        **0.7 pts**
  Defensemen Points    **Addt'l 0.5 pts**

b.  For goalies, the following scoring categories & point totals will be
    used:

  Wins            **2 pts**
  --------------- --------------
  Saves           **0.3 pts**
  Goals Against   **-1.5 pts**
  Shutouts        **3 pts**

c.  ESPN does not award points to goalies for goals or assists. However,
    in the event that a goaltender scores a goal (either by shooting the
    puck himself or by being credited as the last player to touch the
    puck), the Commissioner will manually add 3 points to that owner's
    team. Given that it is impractical for the Commissioner to review
    every game sheet in the NHL, the onus is on the General Manager to
    let the Commissioner know when their goalie has scored a goal.

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
3.  **Lineups & Games Played Limit**

    a.  Points are only accumulated by players and goalies while in an
        Active Roster spot during their scheduled NHL game. Points
        earned remain with the franchise's total points regardless if
        the player is subsequently injured, benched, traded or waived.

    b.  During each game week, teams are limited to playing [24 games at
        forward]{.ul}, [14 games at defense]{.ul} and [6 games at
        goalie]{.ul}. In cases where a game week is extended (See *Rule
        7.1.e*), the games played limit will be adjusted accordingly and
        posted in the Commissioner's note. Every effort should be made
        to utilize all games available.

    c.  In the event a franchise exceeds the Games Played Limit during a
        given week, the team will be assessed a 15 point penalty.
        Additionally, for each position that a franchise exceeds the
        limit, that team's score will be further reduced by the highest
        scoring player(s) at the same position on the day the team
        exceeded the limit (See *Example 7.3.c*)

***Example 7.3.c***

Through Saturday night, Team A has played 13 games at defense. On
Sunday, Team A has 3 defensemen with NHL games (Players X, Y, Z) and
places all 3 of these players in Active Roster spots. The players
accumulate the following points on Sunday:

Player X: 6.0

Player Y: 8.9

Player Z: 1.4

Since Team A played 16 defense games during the week, the team exceeded
the games played limit by 2 games. Therefore, a 15 point penalty is
assessed to Team A's weekly total. Additionally, Team A's point total is
further reduced by 14.9 points (the total of Player X & Y's points on
Sunday) as they were the 2 highest scoring defensemen on the day the
team exceeded the limit.

**\
**

# PLAYOFFS

7.  1.  a.  The top 6 teams at the end of the HOFHL regular season will
            qualify for the playoffs. Each conference winner will
            automatically receive the Number 1 & 2 seeds and a first
            round bye, while the remaining 4 teams will be seeded 3
            through 6 based on their regular season records.

        b.  In the event of a seeding tie, the following tiebreakers, in
            order, will be used:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  Total Points For in the Regular Season

2.  Head to Head record

3.  Total Points For in Head to Head Match-ups

4.  Coin Toss

    a.  In the first round of the playoffs, the matchups will be as
        follows: 3 vs. 6, 4 vs. 5.

    b.  Teams are re-seeded in each subsequent round so that the top
        seeded remaining team matches up against the lowest seeded
        remaining team.

    c.  Scoring categories & lineups are the same in the post-season as
        they are in the regular season (see *Sections 7.2 and 7.3*).

    d.  In the event of a playoff matchup tie, the following
        tiebreakers, in order, will be used:

```{=html}
<!-- -->
```
1.  Team winning the greater number of scoring categories during the
    playoff game week

2.  Regular Season Head to Head record

3.  Total Points For in Regular Season Head to Head Match-ups

4.  Coin Toss

    a.  Once a franchise is eliminated from the playoffs, their season
        is over.

    ```{=html}
    <!-- -->
    ```
    1.  **Consolation Matchups**

Franchises that do not qualify for the playoffs will still continue to
compete during the HOFHL playoff weeks to earn additional Draft Lottery
entries (see *Rule 3.2.b*). The objective of each franchise during this
period is to earn as many points as possible. Matchups (and wins /
losses) do not matter.

# TEAM TRANSFERS

8.  1.  a.  The HOFHL is designed to be a long-term league with stable
            franchise ownership. Owners are discouraged from leaving the
            league, especially mid-season.

        b.  If an owner chooses to leave the league, every effort will
            be made to find a suitable replacement owner to assume
            control of their franchise.

        c.  If an owner must abandon their franchise mid-season, and an
            emergency replacement owner cannot be found, the
            Commissioner will assume control of the franchise in an
            honorable manner in order to uphold the integrity of the
            franchise and league. The Commissioner will not be allowed
            to trade, sign or waive any players on this roster. The
            Commissioner will be allowed to move players on this team's
            roster from the bench to active spots and vice versa. In the
            event of an injury, the Commissioner will be allowed to sign
            a free agent replacement.

# RULEBOOK CHANGES & VOTING

9.  1.  a.  Owners may propose amendments to the rulebook at any time.
            Unless it is an extremely urgent matter, all proposals will
            be reviewed in the offseason and opened up to a league-wide
            vote.

        b.  Each franchise has 1 vote.

        c.  A rule change must be approved by at least 75% of the voting
            owners, as long as a minimum of 7 owners submit a vote. In
            the event a franchise does not participate in a vote, their
            vote will be forfeited.

# LEAGUE HISTORY & RECORDS

*Current owners*

Name of owner

\# of years active

number of championships

number of playoff appearances

*Past General Managers*

all records
